St. Amvrossy Letter 34

		Letter 34 The meaning of the words of the Psalm “Good and upright is
the Lord” Concerning repentance.
“Good and upright (that is, righteous and just) is the Lord, therefore
will He set a law for them that sin in the way” (Psa. 24:8).
What law did the Lord lay down for sinners? He set down a law of
repentance, as He says in the Holy Gospel: “Repent” and, “Except ye
repent ye shall all perish” (Luke 13:5).
Some Christians do not repent at all because of disbelief, and others,
although they repent according to the custom and habit, afterwards
they again sin terribly without fear, senselessly hoping that the Lord
is good. Others see the Lord only as just and do not stop sinning
because of despair, having no hope to receive forgiveness. In
correcting both, the Word of God announces to all that the Lord is
good towards all who repent sincerely and with a firm decision not to
return to their former sins. “There is no sin which vanquishes God’s
love for mankind.” On the other hand, the Lord is just to those who – in
their disbelief or neglect – do not have the desire to repent. He is
also just towards those who occasionally repent, as is the custom; and
then again without fear, they sin grievously, senselessly relying upon
the Lord’s goodness. There are also those who repent but do not say
everything in confession, hiding some sins because of shame. Such,
says the Apostle, partake of the Holy Mysteries unworthily, and
because of unworthy Communion they become exposed to various ills and
sicknesses and some die. It is said by the Apostle: “He that eateth
and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lord’s Body” (ICor. 11:29).
Some may say, “So what are we to do when we often sin involuntarily
because of weakness?” It is one thing to sin because of weakness –
such a sin is easily forgiven – and it is another thing to sin because
of neglect and fearlessness with a grievous sin. Everyone knows that
there are sins unto death and sins which are easily forgiven such as
those in word or thought. Yet in every case there is need for sincere
repentance and voluntary humbling of one’s self, according to the word
of the Gospel, with a firm intention not to return to previous sins.
It is said in the Paterikon: “If you have fallen, rise up! If you fall
again, again rise up!” It is no wonder to fall, but it is shameful and
grievous to remain in sin.
May the all-good Lord give us His all-powerful help in order to hold
on to sincere and true repentance and to fulfill the Gospel words:
“The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by
force” (Mat. 11:12) May we all receive this by the unutterable mercy
of the incarnate Son of God, Who was born from the most holy Virgin.
Amen.
Share this:TwitterFacebookLike this:Like Loading...

	Related
			